---
layout: post
title:  "Random batter"
date:   2018-07-22 11:57:48 +0530
categories: general
---

2018 is perhaps _the best year_ so far in my life. A lot of things happened; good, bad and ugly and that was quite enjoyable.

Firstly, I started writing this. Though infrequently, its better than nothing. I got to buy a raspberry pi and a nexus 5. Second, I got my first _real_ job. I learnt a whole bunch of assembly. I managed to save some money. I watched a whole lot of movies, TV, cricket and football, gifs. I ate more popcorn, pizza, cake than ever. Never eat caramel popcorn. Ever. I attended more birthday parties than ever. Sometimes, I didn't get to sleep till 3:00 AM in the morning and it feels awesome when your eyes burn!(not if you do that for two days in a row, though).

I read a whole bunch of books. Its not as boring as I thought. I still can't digest novels, though. They have too much detail and hard to remember. DBS was awesome (except for [this](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bSyKAKhxdeU), come on, half-an-hour ago he was the protector of a whole universe, he wouldn't do that). Too bad, it ended. I voluntarily spent some money on clothing for the first time. I travelled in AC coach for the first time. I couldn't sleep, though.

I had more than enough awkward conversations where people tried to convince me that dropping out is a bad idea. It went so far that I had been suggested to buy a degree for money. I too considered it for a while(to make them shut up) but dropped the thought for now, turns out it costs only 3L or 75K or even less if you meet certain criteria. Great friends and family. I think I will make enough money to eat food in my life and don't expect much else. I would really like them to shut up, save me 75K but people have loud mouths and I don't have the control over those.

vEB trees are awesome. O(lglg(n)) complexity is crazy :) Xubuntu is not as bad. It is decent but they should really fix their Alt+Tab window to not highlight the window that the mouse pointer is on. Code is in xfwm window.h. Someone already fixed this but its not merged yet. God knows why. I got to buy a Nexus 5 and a raspberry pi which sits in my desk idle. Should do something with this.

I lived in a hell hole for a month or so along with three friends(oggy0, oggy1, oggy2). Now, my place is more comfortable than I would like and want to get out of here. I can live without internet or phone for quite sometime. I don't find it weird.

I took more sick leaves than ever aka health sucks, I am quite certain its because I don't exercise. Ask me if I exercise everytime you see me! Sometimes I am over helpful. Tell me not to. Usually sucks afterwards. Likewise show no mercy. Tell me to figure it out myself. Come by Rust meetup sometime.

I wanted to do [this](https://github.com/letmutx/dex-parser) but never got to it because I am so damn lazy.
